---
title: Review of "Make It Stick%3a The Science of Successful Learning"
--- 

> This is a book about what people can do for themselves right now in
order to learn better and remember longer. - *Brown, Roediger,
McDaniel*

This book discusses effective strategies for learning and gives
intuition for why they are effective.  The strategies are practical
and presented as vehicles toward understanding and insite through case
studies of people who have used them effectively.  Their is science
behind these strategies; they are synthesized from a ten year study
focused on the intersection of experimental cognitive psychology and
education.

The simplicity of strategies is what makes this book remarkable to me.
I have spent time trying to become a better learner.  The strategies
of others who I considered gifted learners left me observing
superficial behaviors.  For example and rather obviously, skilled
learners read material, but what prevents them from forgetting it and
how do they integrate it with other knowledge?  This book reveals what
most skilled learners are doing internally.

# Effortful Learning

Spaced retrieval and heterogeneous study are the primary strategies
suggested in the book; they encourage effortful learning.  Effortful
learning is the research backed, counter-intuitive notion that we
should encourage difficulty while learning.  In other words, we should
dynamically set learning difficulty such that learning is never easy.

Spaced retrieval mitigates forgetting.  Studies have shown that
retrieving knowledge that is not immediately available strengthens our
ability to retrieve it in the future.  In contrast, the benefits are
marginal if uniform retrieval  is done in mass; forgetting and
explicitly working to retrieve knowledge is critical to the learning
process.

Few topics can be used in the absence of context; this may be one
reason why uniform massed practice is difficult to generalize
(something discussed in the book).  Learning different concepts
simultaneously result naturally in comparisons of concepts;
ultimately structuring information in our mind.

Understanding is constructed in three steps process: encoding,
consolidation, and retrieval.  Encoding is the process of putting
knowledge into short term memory, consolidation structures the
knowledge for longer term memory, and retrieval improves
accessibility.  When used regularly, these strategies enrich our
understanding by repeating the encoding, consolidation, and retrieval
process.

# A Practical Strategy for Learning

For myself, the most fundamental component is to remain mindfully
engaged in learning. This means constantly assessing whether I
understand the material. However, left at this, the process of
learning will be terribly inefficient. There must be concrete actions
taken to assess understanding and develop insight. In the following
list I describe three actions, taken from this book, that can promote
engagement.

- Testing: This will aid retrieval and mitigate confusing familiarity
  with understanding. Unfortunately, human instincts are not great at
  assessing understanding; regular assessment mitigates these bad
  instincts. When reading, I have two concrete actions to assess
  myself: 1) If reading a paragraph does not raise at least one
  question than I am probably not understanding the material and 2) I
  have been trying to make a habit of inputing concepts and testing
  myself using [mnemosyne](http://mnemosyne-proj.org/).
- Generation: Generation should improve our understanding by improve
  our model of the concept, it should encourage rule building. When
  reading, we can promote generation by asking ourselves lots of
  questions: "How does this material relate to the last sentence,
  paragraph, chapter, etc?", "What is the author's intent here?",
  "What does this material remind me of and why?", "Can these concepts
  be captured in a more general abstraction?", "What are the concepts
  this material depends on?". For myself, I must remain mindful that
  my answers to such questions should contain substances.
- Elaboration: This is where internalization will happen. Here we want
  to explain things in our own words. However, we must take care to
  not loose precision when explaining our understanding and insights
  in our own words. Letting time pass between exposure to the material
  and elaboration is key to avoid confusing familiarity with building
  understanding. We should also think carefully about exactly how and
  where other concepts are needed. I think elaboration needs to be
  done at differing levels of details. I think this should promote our
  ability to explain concepts to people of varying expertise. For
  instance, I am currently thinking of the following levels: a five
  minute description to a person who has no background in the
  material, an untimed description to an expert in the concept or
  neighboring concepts, an untimed description given as a course where
  we must start from the most basic principles. When giving these
  descriptions, I try to avoid analogies; I seem to use them when I
  cannot put some issue to words and that probably is an indication
  that I need to understand something better. I find I often use them
  when I cannot properly explain a concept.

# Comments
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script type="text/javascript">
    /* * * CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT BEFORE PASTING INTO YOUR WEBPAGE * * */
    var disqus_shortname = 'chaosape'; // Required - Replace example with your forum shortname

    /* * * DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE * * */
    (function() {
        var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type = 'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true;
        dsq.src = '//' + disqus_shortname + '.disqus.com/embed.js';
        (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] || document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq);
    })();
</script>
