---
title: Review of "This Boy's Life"
tags: book review non-fiction
--- 

In early 2000 my mother sent me the book "This Boy's Life" by Tobias
Wolfe. I had put off reading it until just a few weeks ago when I read
it over a four day period. Within forty pages I understood why my
mother liked it and why she thought I would like it. 

"This Boy's Life" is the story of Tobias Wolfe's adolesence. During
this period, Tobias has a yearning to become a stoic intellectual
perceived by others as sophisticated, urbane, and resilent. The
reality of his situation, his lack of discipline, and his general
feelings of unworthiness prevent this yearning from being anything
but. His mother is the constant in his life yet she moves the two
around the United States both to reinvent herself and to escape
destructive relationships. She evetually remarries a man whom
regularly engages in the emotional abuse of Tobias. That all said, we
never truly feel sorry for Tobias. His persistent arrogance and
criminal ingenuity often allows him to overcome the adversity of his
immediate situations.

This book tells a story that any hopeless romanctic should find
familiar.  The books primary theme concerns the stark contrast between
our desires and the reality of our situations. The struggle between
these two notions can move humans to self-loathing, betrayal, deceit,
inspiration, or, perhaps, self-improvement. I think my mother
recognized that this theme was one that has always been present around
me. I believe it is a theme that my mother was never far from as well.
